# PIC 16A - Notes on `1-starting_py.py`


Having attended your first lecture and discussion,
I hope you will execute the code in `1-starting_py.py`
cell by cell, reading every line, and compare it with
the output that is produced.
In the remainder of this page,
I will summarize what I hoped for
you to learn from `1-starting_py.py`.


## Comments

Comments are written using a hashtag (`#`).


## The `print` function

There is a useful built-in
function called `print`.
It does what you'd expect.
It allows you to `print`
many quantities in Python.


## Python is dynamically typed

This means...
 - every quantity in Python has a type (which can
   be obtained using the built-in function `type`);
 - the type associated with a variable can change.


## Arithmetic with the `int` datatype

- Arithmetic with ints in Python works
  almost the same as in C++. However,
  `/` always produces a `float` (and
  there is no incrementing operator
  `++` or decrementing operator `--`).

- If you want `int`-division,
  you need to use `//`.
  However, for two ints `i` and `j`,
   - `i // j` calculates `floor(i / j)` and
   - `i % j` calculates `i - ((i // j) * j)`.

  When `i` is negative, the first formula
  gives a different value to `int(i / j)`,
  which is what `int`-division in C++ calculates.

- Finally, powers can be
  calculated using `**` and
  ints can be very big in Python.


## The `bool` datatype

- The possible values for the `bool` datatype
  are `True` and `False` in Python
  **(notice the capital T and F)**.
- As in C++, comparisons evaluate to booleans.
- We have connectives `not`, `and`, and `or`.

As an example, if you have booleans called
`things_to_hit`, `green_light`, and `no_right_turn_on_red`,
you can specify another boolean as follows.

```python
go = (not things_to_hit) and (green_light or not no_right_turn_on_red)
```

Here is the truth table for `go` in terms of the other three booleans.
It should make sense if you have driven a car in the US.

| `things_to_hit` | `green_light` | `no_right_turn_on_red` |   `go`   |
| :-------------: | :-----------: | :--------------------: | :------: |
|     `True`      |    `True`     |         `True`         |  `False` |
|     `True`      |    `True`     |         `False`        |  `False` |
|     `True`      |    `False`    |         `True`         |  `False` |
|     `True`      |    `False`    |         `False`        |  `False` |
|     `False`     |    `True`     |         `True`         |  `True`  |
|     `False`     |    `True`     |         `False`        |  `True`  |
|     `False`     |    `False`    |         `True`         |  `False` |
|     `False`     |    `False`    |         `False`        |  `True`  |


## Many ways to use quotes

A *string* is a sequence of (unicode) characters.
In most programming languages one can specify a string
by typing a sequence of characters between double quotes.
For example, in Python, `"a sequence of characters"`
is a string of length 24.

Python provides a few different ways to create strings.
 - `'A string created using single quotes.'`
 - `"A string created using double quotes."`
 - `"""A string created using three double quotes."""`

`1-starting_py.py` highlights the benefits of each
by considering the following three pieces of text.

1. Someone said, "I like single quotes." Good for them!

2. Double quotes are someone else's favorite.

3. One person likes single quotes.<br>
   Another likes double quotes.<br>
   What about the person who likes new lines?

It shows the following.

1. When one double quote is used to start and end the string,
   any double quotes in the string need to be specified
   using a backslash. For example,
   `"Someone said, \"I like single quotes.\" Good for them!"`.

2. When single quotes are used to start and end the string,
   any singles quote in the string needs to be specified
   using a backslash. For example,
   `'Double quotes are someone else\'s favorite.'`.

3. Finally, unless one uses three double quotes to start and end the string,
   newline characters must be specified with a backslash as `\n`.
   Three double quotes allow multi-line strings. For example,<br>
   `"""One person likes single quotes.`<br>
   `Another likes double quotes.`<br>
   `What about the person who likes new lines?"""`<br>


## The strings (`str`) datatype

- You can ask for the length of a string
  using the built-in function `len`.
- Strings can be indexed and
  concatenated as in C++.
- One can also multiply a string by an `int`
  to perform multiple self-concatenations.
- There is no special type for characters.
  Characters are strings of length 1.


## Converting between ints and strings

We can cast ints to strings and
numerical strings to ints
by using `str(...)` and `int(...)`,
respectively.


## `print(repr(...))`

`print(repr(...))` makes printed output a little more informative.
