# PIC 16A - Notes on `2-control.py`

I will summarise what I hoped for
you to learn from `2-control.py`.


## Control flow

- There are two common ways
  to use a `for` loop
  to loop through a list `L`.
  - `for el in L:`
    to access each element
    of the list one by one.
  - `for idx in range(...):`,
    that is,
    together with `range`
    to produce indices
    for use with `L`,
    for example, `L[idx]`.
- Both `for` loops leak the iterating variable (`el` and `idx`, respectively)
  because no scope is introduced. You can use `del` to clean up if you like.
- There is `if`, `elif`, `else`, and `while`.


## Indentations matter

Because control flow
does not use braces,
indentations matter a lot.
Using indentations incorrectly
can lead to an `IndentationError` or
to code that executes but has a bug.


## The `list` datatype

- Python has a `list` datatype.
- We can index lists similarly to a vector in C++.
- Negative indices are allowed.
  When `0 < i <= len(L)`
  (so that `0 <= len(L) - i < len(L)`),
  `L[-i]` behaves like `L[len(L) - i]`.
- Lists have *methods*
  (the Pythonic name for member functions)
  called `append`, `insert`, and `pop`.
  - `append` is analogous to `push_back` in C++.
  - `L.insert(idx, val)` inserts `val` at index `idx`.
  - `L.pop()` removes and returns the last element.
- There are built-in functions `min`, `max`, and `sum`
  which accept a list of ints.


## More on the `print` function

- By default, new lines are printed after the arguments that you provide.
  You can change this by using `end=` (see below).
- By default, multiple arguments are each seperated by a single space.
  You can change this by using `sep=` (see below).

For example, consider the following code.
```python
print('1 + 2 is equal to', 1 + 2, 'and 4 + 5 is equal to', 4 + 5)
print()
print('Some great sportspeople:', end=' ')
print('Roger Federer', 'Simone Biles', 'Nathan Cleary', sep=', ')
```

When it executes, the output is as follows.
```
1 + 2 is equal to 3 and 4 + 5 is equal to 9

Some great sportspeople: Roger Federer, Simone Biles, Nathan Cleary
```

Notice that the sportspeople are on the same line as the word "sportspeople" thanks to `end=' '`
and that they are each separated by a comma and a space thanks to `sep=', '`.
