# PIC 16A - Notes on `3a-functions.py`, `3b-functions.py`, `3b-functions.ipynb`, and `3c-functions.py`


## Writing functions without stressing too much

A lot can be accomplished due to your knowledge of C++.
The major differences when writing functions in Python are:
 - we do not specify a type for the parameters;
 - we do not specify a `return` type;
 - when a value is not explicitly returned,
   `None` is returned.

However, after noting these differences,
you are able to write many useful functions off the bat.
Some simple functions have been written in `3a-functions.py` to convince you of this.


## A note regarding Jupyter Lab

Jupyter Lab attempts to help by
 - evaluating the last expression in a cell and
 - displaying the evaluated value if it is not `None`.

This is helpful in many contexts,
but it can create confusion for students
who are still learning the difference between
 - functions that only `print` to the console and
 - functions that return a value that is not `None`.

`3b-functions.py` and `3b-functions.ipynb` highlight this issue carefully.
There is something additional to notice which might help you.
When executing these files, the third and fourth cells
always produce the same output. This is because
they end with a function call to `print`
(which returns `None`).

### The takeaway

Be a little careful with Jupyter Lab.
Some printed quantities are only printed
because Jupyter Lab thinks it is useful to do so.
This will never be an issue if the last line
in the cell calls the `print` function.


## WARNING

`3c-functions.py` starts by highlighting that,
in Python, when a value is not explicitly returned,
`None` is returned (this was noted above).

The main takeaway from `3c-functions.py` is that
if you do not dedicate a reasonable amount of time
to understanding the following three aspects of Python,
then Python will be a confusing language for you to use.

- What a value consists of in Python.
- How functions pass their arguments.
- How function scope works in Python.

Many casual Python users have a sketchy understanding of these aspects of the language. For a while, this included me! Since teaching this class just once, I understand the rules far better and have found that I spend way less time debugging.